# INTRODUCTION #

The **TiffTools** package contains the following classes :

- **TiffSplitter**, which can split multipage TIFF files into separate single-page TIFFs
- **TiffMerger**, which takes several input TIFF files, and generates a multipage output TIFF.

## The TiffSplitter class ##

The **TiffSplitter** class takes a multi-page TIFF file and splits it into separate TIFF files containing one image at a time.

It can operate on files that are larger than the available memory, or simply on strings containing TIFF data already loaded into memory from an existing TIFF file (or generated on-the-fly).

Using it is fairly simple : 

	include ( 'TiffSplitter.phpclass' ) ;

	$tiff 	=  TiffSplitter::Load ( 'sample.tif' ) ;

(note that you won't instantiate a **TiffSplitter** object directly : you will have to call either the *Load()* or *LoadFromString()* methods to do that).

Once an instance has been created, you can use the array access or iterator methods to loop through each page of your input file :

	 
	for ( $i = 0 ; $i  <  count ( $tiff ) ; $i ++ )
	   {
			$tiff_page 		=  $tiff [$i] ;
			... do something with $tiff_page ...
	    }

or :

	foreach  ( $tiff  as  $tiff_page )
	   {
			... do something with $tiff_page ...
	    }

Each TIFF page, of type **TiffSplitterPage** contained in a **TiffSplitter** object has two interesting methods :

- *AsString()*, which returns TIFF data for the current page directly as a string
- *SaveTo()*, which saves the current page to the specified file.

So, a basic example to save multi-page TIFF files as single-page ones would be :

	include ( 'TiffSplitter.phpclass' ) ;

	$tiff 	=  TiffSplitter::Load ( 'sample.tif' ) ;

	foreach  ( $tiff  as  $tiff_page )
	   {
			$tiff_page -> SaveTo ( "sample.page.{$tiff_page -> PageNumber}.tif" ) ;
	    }

## The TiffMerger class ##

The **TiffMerger** class does the opposite of **TiffSplitter** : it takes several input TIFF files and combines them into a single one. The supplied TIFF files can of course in turn contain multiple pages.

Special care has been taken about memory consumption :

- Only the Image File Directories (IFD) entries are loaded into memory when input files are added. An IFD is a structure describing various components of a TIFF page ; it contains entries which give information such as the current page number, the offsets in the file where to find image data, etc. Each IFD entry is 12-bytes long and an IFD typically has between 20 and 30 entries. So, as a raw calculation, an IFD entry virtually takes less than 1Kb in memory (to be multiplied by the number of pages present in the supplied input files). Of course, the memory overhead implied by PHP has to be added, but you should be able to combine thousands of TIFF files with your current memory limit.
- The output TIFF file is generated by 64Kb blocks. This limit can be a little bit greater sometimes for big images but should never exceed a few megabytes (<5).

Given the above features, you should be able to merge thousands of TIFF files together.

Merging multiple TIFF files is fairly simple ; first, instantiate a **TiffSplitter** object :

	$merger 		=  new TiffMerger ( ) ;

Then add the files you want to merge :

	$merger -> Add ( 'file1.tif', 'file2.tif', ..., 'filen.tif' ) ;

Finally, merge the supplied input files and save the result :

	$merger -> SaveTo ( 'output.tif' ) ;

There is also an *AsString()** method, which returns the output tiff contents as a string :

	$tiff_data 	=  $merger -> AsString ( ) ;

but beware because, this time, you will need as much memory as needed to hold the TIFF contents as a string into memory !


## A note about endianness ##

Endianness describes how the bytes of 16-, 32- or 64-bits values are physically stored in the file (this also applies for RAM). It can be of two types :

- Little endian : the least significant byte (LSB) is stored first, then the second one, up to the most significant byte (MSB). This is typical to Intel architectures. For example, the 16-bits value 0xFF00 will be stored as :

	00 FF

- Big endian : the MSB will be stored first, up to the LSB. The value of the above example will then be stored as :

	FF 00

TIFF files can be generated either in little- or big-endian format. This information is given by the first two bytes of the file (0x4949 for little endian, 0x4D4D for big endian).

The **TiffSplitter** class generates its output files using the endianness of the supplied input file.

The **TiffMerger** class generates its output file using the endianness specified to its constructor (by default, little endian). Note that it supports any kind of endianness in the input files you supply.


# KNOWN LIMITATIONS AND ISSUES #

The **TiffSplitter** and **TiffMerger** classes currently have the following limitations :

- They cannot directly generate PDF files. This is planned for a future release
- The EXIF information (and other extended metadata information, such as GPS\_EXIF) will not be included in the output file(s)

# DOCUMENTATION REFERENCES #

The following links provide useful information about the TIFF file format :

- [https://www.itu.int/itudoc/itu-t/com16/tiff-fx/docs/tiff6.pdf](https://www.itu.int/itudoc/itu-t/com16/tiff-fx/docs/tiff6.pdf "https://www.itu.int/itudoc/itu-t/com16/tiff-fx/docs/tiff6.pdf") : TIFF V6 format specification
- [http://www.awaresystems.be/imaging/tiff.html](http://www.awaresystems.be/imaging/tiff.html "http://www.awaresystems.be/imaging/tiff.html") : really useful information and reference about the TIFF file format


# CLASS REFERENCE #

## TiffSplitter class ##

The **TiffSplitter** class is used to open a multi-page TIFF file and provides a way to save each image into separate output TIFF files.

The **TiffSplitter** class cannot be instantiated directly : you have to use the *Load()* or *LoadFromString()* method instead.

The **TiffSplitter** class inherits from **TiffImage**.

### Methods ###

#### Load ####

	$tiff 	=  TiffSplitter::Load ( $filename, $buffer_size = 8192, $cache_size = 512 )

Creates an instance of the **TiffSplitter** class and loads from the specified file primary information about its contents. This mainly concerns Image File Directory (IFD) information.

Only the necessary parts of the specified file are loaded into memory, the rest of the file being cached on demand. Two parameters affect this behavior :

- *$buffer\_size* : Size of a cache buffer. The default value of 8192 should be enough in most cases.
- *$cache\_size* : Maximum number of buffers in the cache. The default values for *$buffer\_size* and *$cache\_size* has been designed to allow for a cache of up to 4Mb.

Caching information is the best way to handle files that are greater than the size specified by your *memory\_limit* PHP setting. Smaller cache sizes will mean more disk accesses, greater cache sizes will consume more memory. It's up to you to chose the right balance, depending on your processing needs.

Note that greater buffer sizes will not necessarily improve performance. A size of 8Kb is in a mjority of case well suited for Linux systems.

#### LoadFromString ####

	$tiff 	=  TiffSplitter::LoadFromString ( $tiff_data ) ;

Creates a **TiffSplitter** instance from the specified string, which can contain TIFF data loaded either from an existing TIFF file, or generated on-the-fly.

Note that no caching mechanism will apply in this case.


### Properties ###

#### $DEBUG (boolean) ####

Setting this static property to *true* will show information about the internal structure of the TIFF file.

#### Endianness ####

Specifies the endianness (byte order) of the supplied TIFF data ; it can take the following values :

- *TiffImage::LITTLE\_ENDIAN* : Multiple byte values are stored with the least significant byte first.
- *TiffImage::BIG\_ENDIAN* : Multiple byte values are stored with the most significant byte first.

You cannot change the endianness of the generated output TIFF files. This property is informational only.

#### $Filename (string) ####

Input filename. This property will be set to *false* if the object has been created with the *LoadFromString()* method.


## TiffSplitterPage class ##

This class encapsulates one single page from the supplied multi-page TIFF file. It inherits from the **TiffPage** class (which is not documented here). It provides the following :

### Methods ###

#### AsString ####

	$data 		=  $tiff_page -> AsString ( $format = TiffImage::OUTPUT_FORMAT_TIFF ) ;

Returns TIFF data corresponding to the page. This data can be directly saved on disk.

The *$format* parameter can have one of the following values :

- *TiffImage::OUTPUT_FORMAT_TIFF* : Generates a TIFF file.
- *TiffImage::OUTPUT_FORMAT_PDF* : Generates a PDF file (not yet implemented).

#### SaveTo ####

	$tiff_page -> SaveTo ( $filename, $format = TiffImage::OUTPUT_FORMAT_TIFF ) ;

Saves the page to the specified file.

The endianness (little-endian or big-endian for 16- and 32-bits values) is preserved.


### Properties ###

#### PageHeight ####

Page height in lines.


#### PageNumber ####

Corresponding page number. Starts from zero most of the time.


#### PageWidth ####

Page width in pixels.


## TiffMergerClass ##

The **TiffMerger** class combines multiple TIFF files (either multipage or not) into a single output file.

### Methods ###

#### Constructor ####

	$merger 	=  new  TiffMerger ( $output_endianness = TiffImage::LITLLE\_ENDIAN ) ;

Creates an instance of a merger object, specifying the endianness of the output file that will be generated.

The *$output\_endianness* parameter can either be *TiffImage::LITTLE\_ENDIAN* (the default) or *TiffImage::BIG\_ENDIAN*.

#### Add ####

	$merger ->  Add ( ... ) ;

Adds the specified files to the list of files to be merged. The arguments can be any number of strings or arrays of strings specifying the TIFF files to be added.


#### AsString ####

	$tiff_data 	=  $merger -> AsString ( $format = TiffImage::OUTPUT_FORMAT_TIFF ) ;

Returns the contents of the merged input TIFF files as a single string. This string can later be directly saved to an output TIFF file using the *file\_put\_contents()* function.

You should be aware that the size of the returned string should be more or less the total size of all the supplied input TIFF files, so beware of your current PHP memory limit.

The *$format* parameter specifies the output format. Currently, only *TiffImage::OUTPUT\_FORMAT\_TIFF* is supported.

#### SaveTo ####

	$merger -> SaveTo ( $filename, $format = TiffImage::OUTPUT_FORMAT_TIFF ) ;

Merges the supplied input TIFF files and saves the result to the file specified by *$filename*.

The *$format* parameter specifies the output format. Currently, only *TiffImage::OUTPUT\_FORMAT\_TIFF* is supported.
